Cross Cluster Database Replication - adding GA docs (#3107)
neo4j/docs-operations: modules/ROOT/pages/clustering/replicating-databases-across-clusters.adoc

|===

[[create-replica-db-example]]
=== Example
Let's assume you have two separate clusters running independently from each other: *Cluster A* and *Cluster B*.

On *Cluster A*, the database `foo` is running and has three servers with cluster addresses: `server01.example.com:6000`, `server02.example.com:6000`, `server03.example.com:6000`.

On *Cluster B*, run the following command to create a replica database `foo-replica` (three primaries, two secondaries) that will replicate from the upstream database `foo` on *Cluster A*:

[source, cypher]
----
CREATE REPLICA DATABASE `foo-replica`
TOPOLOGY 3 PRIMARIES 2 SECONDARIES
OPTIONS {
  replicaConfig: {
    remote: "foo",
    addresses: [
      "server01.example.com:6000",
      "server02.example.com:6000",
      "server03.example.com:6000"
    ]
  }
};
----

The command can only be executed successfully if the replica database is able to contact the remote cluster endpoints listed in `addresses`.
If not, the command results in an error.

Verify that the `foo-replica` database is online on the desired number of servers, in the desired roles.
Note that the type is labelled as `replica`.

> If a `seedURI` is also specified, the initial seeding of the replica database is done from the `seedURI`.

Reviewer: We don't mention `seedURI` anywhere before. Why should we use it? And if we can use it, when and how to do it?

Author: so seedURI is one of the options of creating a database (see https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/current/database-administration/standard-databases/seed-from-uri/), but maybe we should link it or create a new section here?

We can use it if we want to start the seeding of a database from a backup location usually.

Reviewer: good, so there is also a way to create a replica from a database backup using `seedURI`. If you specify remote `addresses` then the replica pulls transactions from the upstream db using servers listed in `addresses`. If you specify `pullURI`, then the replica pulls diffs from there after initialization.
Am I right?

This way of creating a replica could be presented as a separate section. Let me think how to do it better.

Author: yes that's exactly so. Just to give further context (though we probably do not need to tell the customer this in the docs), internally we are applying transactions - either pulling transactions from addresses, or unpacking backups and getting transactions that way. As such ur mental model is correct.

Reviewer: I added this information in a format of a tip. See 0d941471a8b3de938feebf5c2c2377fcb9df9de0

Ensure that clusters run the same Neo4j version, and that version must be 2026.08 or later.

The commands and procedures for creating and promoting replica databases are supported by Cypher 25.

All replica databases are *read-only*.
A replica database can have topology with primary and secondary copies that follow the servers' mode constraints.
However, both primaries and secondaries remain read-only.
Neither replica primaries nor replica secondaries accept write operations.

[[create-replica-via-the-network]]
== Creating a replica database via the network

This creation method is recommended when the two clusters are directly connected over the network.
Inter-cluster encryption and mutual trust between the clusters are also strongly recommended.

[[syntax-create-replica-db-via-network]]
.CREATE REPLICA DATABASE via the network connection
[source, syntax, role="noheader"]
----
CREATE REPLICA DATABASE name
[[SET] TOPOLOGY n PRIMAR{Y|IES} [m SECONDAR{Y|IES}]]
OPTIONS {replicaConfig: {remote: upstreamDatabaseName, addresses: remoteAddresses}}
[WAIT [n [SEC[OND[S]]]]|NOWAIT]
----

> .CREATE REPLICA DATABASE with `replicaConfig` for remote addresses

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.`replicaConfig` for remote addresses
```

[options="header", width="100%", cols="2m,4a"]
|===
| Option | Description

| replicaConfig
|
Replica config of upstream details to pull from.

Type: `MAP`

Defines the upstream information for the replica to pull from.
Possible keys of this map include:

`remote`:: The name of the upstream database in a remote cluster.
`addresses`:: A list of xref:configuration/configuration-settings.adoc#config_dbms.cluster.endpoints[cluster endpoints] for the servers in the remote cluster.
Use this if there is a direct network connection between clusters. +

> There is no requirement that every remote server hosts the upstream database.

Reviewer: Recently we added "There is no requirement that every remote server hosts the upstream database" to the option remoteAddresses of the internal.dbms.createReplicaDatabase() procedure. Should we use this clarification here?

Author: isn't this added to the create replica DDL rather than the `internal.dbms.createReplicaDatabase`?

<img width="863" height="594" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c8c823f9-0205-4538-a16a-6b7d20be244f" />

Reviewer: I added this sentence to the `addresses` description. If that's correct, then everything is good.

Author: So there is a nuance here I've just realized, that we should highlight to the user.

If the upstream is version `2026.08` and later, there is not requirement every remote server hosts the upstream database.

However, if the upstream is a version earlier than `2026.08`, every remote server in the addresses has to host the upstream database.

Reviewer: addressed in 0d941471a8b3de938feebf5c2c2377fcb9df9de0

=== Initialization

Initialization always starts from a complete backup chain.
A complete backup chain contains a full backup and, optionally, some number of differential backups that follow it without gaps.

When only `pullURI` is specified, the complete backup chain must be available at `pullURI`.
The replica initializes its store from that complete chain.

If `seedURI` is also specified, initial seeding is done from the complete backup chain at `seedURI` instead.
In this case, `pullURI` is used after initialization to pull differential backups.

The user is responsible for creating and pushing the complete backup chain to the bucket or file-system location used for initialization.

image::replica-backup-pulling-initialization.svg[title="Initializing a replica database from a complete backup chain", width="700"]

[[replica-running]]
=== Running

After initialization, the replica consumes only differential backups from `pullURI`.
The differential backup chain must remain unbroken from the replica database's current point onward.

The user is responsible for continuing to create and push differential backups for the upstream database to the `pullURI` location.

> If the differential backup chain is broken, for example because a required differential backup is missing, the replica database must be recreated from a complete backup chain.

Reviewer: This sentence is not super useful or clear: If the diff backup chain is broken ... the replica db must be recreated from a complete backup chain.

The second part of the sentence doesn't say what to do if the diff chain is broken.

But previously we said that a complete backup chain is a chain of a full backup + diffs (optionally). So, does this _the replica db must be recreated from a complete backup chain_ mean that the replica must be recreated from the latest full backup?
At the same time, we state that a replica consumes only diffs after initialization.

Author: I see that this is not so clear, let me see if I can add something to the product to make it clearer about gaps in the chain. Will get back to you about this

----

[[create-replica-via-remote-backup-pulling]]
== Creating a replica database with remote backup pulling

Replication can also be done by retrieving backups through cloud object storage or a file system.
The advantage of this approach is that it eliminates the need for a direct network connection between the clusters.

The user is responsible for creating the required backups and pushing them to the bucket or file-system location referenced by `pullURI`.

[[create-replica-db-via-backups]]
.CREATE REPLICA DATABASE via remote backup pulling
[source, syntax, role="noheader"]
----
CREATE REPLICA DATABASE name
[[SET] TOPOLOGY n PRIMAR{Y|IES} [m SECONDAR{Y|IES}]]
OPTIONS {replicaConfig: {remote: upstreamDatabaseName, pullURI: backupURI}}
[WAIT [n [SEC[OND[S]]]]|NOWAIT]
----

> .CREATE REPLICA DATABASE with `replicaConfig` via backups

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.`replicaConfig` for pulling backups
```

| "foo-replica" | "replica" | "read-only" | "localhost:7689" | "primary"   | FALSE  | {replicaConfig: {remote: "foo", pullURI: "s3://myBucket/"}} |
| "foo-replica" | "replica" | "read-only" | "localhost:7690" | "secondary" | FALSE  | {replicaConfig: {remote: "foo", pullURI: "s3://myBucket/"}} |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
----

=== Recovery point objective (RPO)

RPO is determined by the frequency of differential backup creation and transmission, combined with the replica pull interval.
A replica database checks for new differential backups at the interval configured by xref:configuration/configuration-settings.adoc#config_db.cluster.backup.pull_interval[`db.cluster.backup.pull_interval`], which defaults to 1 minute (`1m`).

To achieve a low RPO:

* Increase backup frequency: create and push differential backups more often.
* Reduce the pull interval if needed.
* Use <<create-replica-via-the-network, network replication>>, which streams transactions continuously and provides a near-zero RPO.

> For example, with hourly differential backups and the default 1-minute pull interval, failover can result in the loss of up to about one hour of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, with hourly differential backups and the default 1-minute pull interval, failover can result in up to one hour of data loss.
```

CREATE REPLICA DATABASE `foo-replica`
TOPOLOGY 3 PRIMARIES 1 SECONDARY
OPTIONS {

>   existingData: "use",

Reviewer: I removed `existingData` from the command because this option is deprecated in Cypher 25 and plays no role

In order to do this, plot the xref:monitoring/metrics/reference.adoc#db-tx-metrics[`<prefix>.database.<db>.transaction.last_committed_tx_id`] metric for both the upstream and replica databases.
This difference effectively captures the lag between the upstream and the replica.

[[ccdr-versions-and-upgrades]]
== Versions and upgrades

[[ccdr-differing-versions]]
=== Differing versions upstream and downstream

The downstream cluster where the replica database is created must run Neo4j 2026.08 or later.

> The upstream cluster can run Neo4j 2025.01 or later, up to and including the version of the downstream cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upstream cluster can run Neo4j 2025.01 or later, but must not run a version later than the downstream cluster.
```

[[ccdr-upgrade-order]]

> === Upgrading order

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Upgrade order
```

When upgrading clusters that participate in cross-cluster database replication, upgrade the downstream cluster before the upstream cluster.

[[ccdr-upgrade-types]]

> === Upgrading types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Upgrade types
```

> When using <<create-replica-via-the-network, network-based replication>>, the server addresses specified in the `replicaConfig.addresses` list at replica creation time are fixed and cannot be changed after creation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using <<create-replica-via-the-network, network-based replication>>, the server addresses specified in `replicaConfig.addresses` at replica creation time are fixed and cannot be changed afterwards.
```

The replica uses these exact addresses to connect to the upstream cluster.
This means that:

* *DNS-based upgrades* and *in-place rolling upgrades* are safe, because the server addresses remain the same.

> * *Additive rolling upgrades*, where new servers with different addresses replace the original ones, will not work because the replica cannot discover the new addresses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *New server rolling upgrades*, where new servers with different addresses replace the original ones, will cause replication to fail because the replica cannot discover the new addresses.
```

> If you need to change the upstream addresses of a replica, you must drop and recreate the replica database with the new addresses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need to change the upstream addresses used by a replica, you must drop and recreate the replica database with the new addresses.
```

> 

Reviewer: What is about upgrade process when using remote backup pulling method? Are there any limitations or considerations? What about compatibility of backups and replica database?
